## Docker images for Vespa development

This repo contains Docker images for Vespa development on CentOS Stream 8 (Vespa 8) and CentOS 7 (Vespa 7).
[vespa-build-centos-stream8](https://hub.docker.com/repository/docker/vespaengine/vespa-build-centos-stream8)
is used for only building Vespa, while
[vespa-dev-centos-stream8](https://hub.docker.com/repository/docker/vespaengine/vespa-dev-centos-stream8)
is used for active development of Vespa with building, unit testing and running of system tests.
vespa-dev-centos-stream8 depends on vespa-build-centos-stream8. To pull the images:

    docker pull docker.io/vespaengine/vespa-build-centos-stream8:latest
    docker pull docker.io/vespaengine/vespa-dev-centos-stream8:latest

Commits to master will automatically trigger new builds and deployment on Docker Hub.

Read more at the Vespa project [homepage](http://docs.vespa.ai).

The project is covered by the [Apache License, Version 2.0](https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0).


## Vespa development on CentOS Stream 8

This guide describes how to build, unit test and system test Vespa on CentOS Stream 8 using Docker or Podman.
Change from `docker` to `podman` in the commands below if using Podman.

When doing Vespa development it is important that the turnaround time between code changes
and running unit tests and system tests is short.
[vespa-dev-centos-stream8](https://hub.docker.com/repository/docker/vespaengine/vespa-dev-centos-stream8)
provides a complete environment for this.
The code is compiled using mvn, cmake and make and then installed into your personal install directory.
Vespa can be executed directly from this directory when for instance running system tests.


### Docker configuration

#### Docker on macOS

Make sure Docker has sufficient resources:

Open Docker - Preferences - Resources and set:
* CPUs: Minimum 2. Use 8 or more for faster build times.
* Memory: Minimum 8 GB. 16 GB or more is preferred.
* Disk size: 128 GB.

#### Docker on Linux

Make sure Docker can be executed without sudo for the scripts in this guide to work:

    sudo groupadd docker
    sudo usermod -aG docker $(id -un)
    sudo systemctl restart docker
    
Log out and login again; or run `sudo su - $USER` command to continue.

#### Podman on macOS

Install Podman Desktop:

    brew install podman-desktop

Create a new Podman Machine with sufficient resources (Preferences - Resources - Create new ...)
* CPUs: Minimum 2. Use 8 or more for faster build times.
* Memory: Minimum 8 GB. 16 GB or more is preferred.
* Disk size: 128 GB.
* Machine with root privileges: Enabled

### Setup the Docker container

#### Download the latest vespa-dev-centos-stream8 Docker image

    docker pull docker.io/vespaengine/vespa-dev-centos-stream8:latest

#### Create the Docker container

##### Remote debugging

If you want to be able to attach a remote debugger (e.g. IntelliJ) to a process inside the container,
you need to add port forwarding at this stage. It cannot be done after the container has been created.
To allow debugging on port 5005, insert the following line in between the lines to the command in the
appropriate section below:

    -p 127.0.0.1:5005:5005 \

##### With explicit Docker volume (recommended for macOS)

First, create a long lived Docker volume.
This lets us persist data generated by and used by the Docker container.
Skip this step if the volume already exists.

    docker volume create volume-vespa-dev-centos-stream8

Second, create the container by mounting the volume as the home directory inside the container:

    docker create \
        -p 127.0.0.1:3334:22 \
        -v volume-vespa-dev-centos-stream8:/home/$(id -un) \
        --privileged \
        --name vespa-dev-centos-stream8 \
        docker.io/vespaengine/vespa-dev-centos-stream8:latest

##### With directory volume mount (recommended for Linux)

A directory on the host machine can be mounted into the container using the -v option.
This lets us persist data generated by and used by the Docker container.
When running Docker on a Linux host there is basically no overhead doing so.
First, create a volume directory on the host:

    mkdir -p $HOME/volumes/vespa-dev-centos-stream8

Second, run docker create with the -v option to mount the volume directory as the home directory in the container:

    docker create \
        -p 127.0.0.1:3334:22 \
        -v $HOME/volumes/vespa-dev-centos-stream8:/home/$(id -un) \
        --privileged \
        --name vespa-dev-centos-stream8 \
        docker.io/vespaengine/vespa-dev-centos-stream8:latest


#### Start the Docker container

    docker start vespa-dev-centos-stream8

#### Configure the Docker container

Ensure you have an SSH key before running the configure-container.sh script.
If not, use the following guide
[to generate a new SSH key](https://help.github.com/en/github/authenticating-to-github/generating-a-new-ssh-key-and-adding-it-to-the-ssh-agent).

    mkdir -p $HOME/git
    cd $HOME/git
    git clone git@github.com:vespa-engine/docker-image-dev.git
    cd $HOME/git/docker-image-dev/dev/centos-stream8
    ./configure-container.sh docker vespa-dev-centos-stream8

This adds yourself as user in the container, copies authorized keys to ensure ssh can be used,
and sets environment variables needed for building Vespa.

#### Build the vespa-dev-centos-stream8 Docker image (optional)

    cd $HOME/git/docker-image-dev/dev/centos-stream8
    docker build -t vespaengine/vespa-dev-centos-stream8:latest .

Use this for testing if doing changes to the Docker image.


### Build Vespa

#### SSH into the container

    ssh -A 127.0.0.1 -p 3334

If the ssh command fails, see [SSH troubleshooting](#ssh-troubleshooting)


#### Checkout Vespa repo

    mkdir -p $HOME/git
    cd $HOME/git
    git clone git@github.com:vespa-engine/vespa.git
    cd $HOME/git/vespa

#### Clean up old state (if using a long lived docker volume)
    
If you are persisting data from a previous container, clean out old state to ensure that the latest version
of build tools will be used:

    git clean -fdx
    ccache --clear
    
#### Build Java modules

    ./bootstrap.sh java
    mvn clean install --threads 1C -Dmaven.javadoc.skip=true -Dmaven.source.skip=true -DskipTests

#### Build C++ modules

    cd $HOME/git/vespa
    cmake3 .
    make -j 9

Set the number of compilation threads (-j argument) to the number of CPU cores + 1.

##### Build and optimize for newer cpu architectures

You can use the compiler flags `-march=` and `-mtune=` to specify the CPU generation to build for. For details and options consult the
[GCC manual](https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/x86-Options.html#x86-Options).
The below command will setup building with the instruction set available on the Intel Haswell CPU generation
and optimize code generation for the even newer Intel Icelake CPU generation,
but still use only the instruction set available on Haswell.

    cmake3 -DVESPA_CPU_ARCH_FLAGS="-march=haswell -mtune=skylake" .

#### Install modules

    make install/fast

Default install directory is $HOME/vespa ($VESPA_HOME).


### Run unit tests

#### Test all Java modules

    mvn test --threads 1C

#### Test specific Java module (e.g. container-search)

    mvn test --threads 1C -pl container-search

#### Test all C++ modules

    ctest -j 9

#### Test specific C++ module (e.g. searchlib)

    ctest -j 9 -R "^searchlib_"


### Run system tests

#### Checkout system-test repo

    cd $HOME/git
    git clone git@github.com:vespa-engine/system-test.git

Note that the system test scrips are already in your PATH inside the Docker container.

#### Copy feature flag overrides from system test repo

Some system tests depend on feature flag overrides.

    cp $HOME/git/system-test/docker/include/feature-flags.json $HOME/vespa/var/vespa/flag.db

#### Start nodeserver in one terminal

    nodeserver.sh

#### Run system test in another terminal

    cd $HOME/git/system-test/tests/search/basicsearch
    runtest.sh basic_search.rb

### Building and running Vespa with sanitizer instrumentation

Vespa natively supports building and running C++ code instrumented using [sanitizers](https://github.com/google/sanitizers).

#### Building C++ code with sanitizers

Pass the `VESPA_USE_SANITIZER=sanitizer` variable to CMake, where `sanitizer`
must be one of the following:

* `address` - instrument using [AddressSanitizer](https://github.com/google/sanitizers/wiki/AddressSanitizer)
* `thread` - instrument using [ThreadSanitizer](https://github.com/google/sanitizers/wiki/ThreadSanitizerCppManual)
* `undefined` - instrument using [UndefinedBehaviorSanitizer](https://clang.llvm.org/docs/UndefinedBehaviorSanitizer.html)

It's not possible to instrument with multiple sanitizers at the same time.

Example for generating build-files that instrument Vespa using ThreadSanitizer:

```
cmake3 -DVESPA_USE_SANITIZER=thread .
```

Note that vespamalloc is not built when sanitizers are configured, as both vespamalloc
and sanitizers will attempt to intercept/override default libc malloc API calls.

#### Running instrumented unit tests

Unit tests can be run as usual, both directly from the terminal and from within CLion.

If a test is flaky (especially if it involves a rare race condition), it's often useful
to be able to run one particular test in a loop until it fails. Both GTest and the sanitizers
can be easily configured using environment variables.

Example environment variables for running a single test case 100 times, immediately aborting
if either the test fails or ThreadSanitizer detects a problem (here presented in CLion run
configuration format):

```
GTEST_FILTER=MyFlakyTestSuite.my_flaky_test_case;GTEST_REPEAT=100;TSAN_OPTIONS=halt_on_error=1;GTEST_FAIL_FAST=1
```

When setting your own `TSAN_OPTIONS` environment variable you may have to manually add the
`suppressions` option and point it to the [tsan-suppressions.txt](https://github.com/vespa-engine/vespa/blob/master/tsan-suppressions.txt)
file found in the Vespa source code root directory to avoid getting reports for already known false positives.
This option is automatically set when running unit tests via CTest.

Note that you cannot run an instrumented unit test under Valgrind.

#### Running instrumented system tests

As with unit tests, system tests can be run as usual with no extra setup needed.
However, since system tests run with many instrumented processes simultaneously, it's
useful to configure sanitizers to emit per-process error logs and to suppress known,
benign warnings.

Processes are launched in the context of the system test node server, so export
any environment variables prior to launching it.

Example (substitute paths with your own):

```
export TSAN_OPTIONS="suppressions=/home/myuser/git/vespa/tsan-suppressions.txt log_path=/home/myuser/tsan_logs/log history_size=7 detect_deadlocks=1 second_deadlock_stack=1"
nodeserver.sh
```

##### Troubleshooting

If processes emit fatal sanitizer warnings on startup, e.g:

```
==51385==FATAL: ThreadSanitizer: failed to intercept munmap
```

then this is usually a sign that there are traces of a previous (non-instrumented) vespamalloc
build in your Vespa install tree. Vespa startup scripts will implicitly pick up and load
vespamalloc if it's present, regardless of instrumentation status. The easiest way to get
around this is to wipe the install tree and re-run `make install`.

### Use CLion or IntelliJ via X11 forwarding from macOS

#### Install XQuartz for macOS
XQuartz is a version of the X.Org X Window System for macOS. Download
[here](https://www.xquartz.org/).

#### Configure sshd inside container to use ipv4
Set ```AddressFamily inet``` inside ```/etc/ssh/sshd_config``` and restart sshd:

    sudo kill -HUP <sshd-pid>

#### ssh into container with X11 forwarding
Open a XQuartz terminal and run:

    ssh -Y -A 127.0.0.1 -p 3334

Then start CLion or IntelliJ from this terminal.


### SSH troubleshooting

If the ssh command fails, e.g. with the following message:

`ssh kex_exchange_identification: Connection closed by remote host`

then, execute an interactive shell on the container:

    docker exec -it vespa-dev-centos-stream8 /bin/bash

Inside the shell, check if there are any host keys:

    ls -l /etc/ssh

If the folder does not contain any `ssh_host_*` files, use this command to generate host keys:

    sudo ssh-keygen -A

Then, start the ssh daemon:

    $(which sshd)

If you need to debug further, add the flags `-Ddp` to the above command. In another terminal, try to ssh
into the container again with the appropriate level of verbosity, e.g.

    ssh -vvv -A 127.0.0.1 -p 3334


## Vespa 7 development on CentOS 7
CentOS 7 is the officially supported OS for Vespa 7, the previous major version of Vespa.
To build, unit test, and system test Vespa on CentOS 7,
please follow the guide for Vespa development on CentOS Stream 8, but replace **centos-stream8** with **centos7** in the commands.
